Add verbatim builtin. (#11123)
ethereum/solidity: docs/yul.rst

the additional optimiser steps will be run on it.

verbatim
^^^^^^^^

The set of ``verbatim`` builtin functions lets you create bytecode for opcodes
that are not known to the Yul compiler. It also allows you to create
bytecode sequences that will not be touched by the optimizer.

The functions are ``verbatim_<n>i_<m>o("<data>", ...)``, where
 - ``n`` is a decimal that specifies the number of input stack slots / variables
 - ``m`` is a decimal that specifies the number of output stack slots / variables
 - ``data`` is a string literal that contain the sequence of bytes

If ``n`` is or ``m`` is zero, the full part can be left out.
For example, ``verbatim_2o`` is a function that outputs two stack slots
and does not consume any, while ``verbatim`` has no effect on the stack
and ``verbatim_1i`` consumes one stack slot.

If you for example want to define a function that multiplies the input
by two, without the optimizer touching the constant two, you can use

.. code-block::

>     let x := ...

Reviewer: I guess you need to change this, so docs CI job can pass

    let double := verbatim_1i_1o(hex"600202, x)

This code will result in a ``dupN`` opcode to retrieve ``x``
directly followed by ``600202``. The code is assumed to
consume the copied value of ``x`` and produce the result
on the top of the stack. The compiler then generates code
to allocate a stack slot for ``double`` and store the result there.

Since you could be using unknown opcodes, the ``verbatim`` builtins
are being treated as having worst-case side-effects, i.e. the optimizer
assumes they can potentially modify all state. On the other hand,
it assumes that such builtins will leave the stack unchanged, except for the
input and output values.

The optimizer works if there are jumps inside the ``verbatim`` code,

> but control-flow should not jump out of or into this code.

Reviewer 2: Yeah, ok, @hrkrshnn is definitely right in that there's more things to consider here. A few I remember are:
- Accessing (even reading) stack contents outside the designated input variables results in undefined behaviour.
- Violating the specified stack balance results in undefined behaviour.
- Use of `gas` and `pc` is discouraged unless you know exactly what you're doing.

And maybe even some technical details like
"The optimizer assumes that `verbatim` can read and/or modify the entire state (i.e. storage and memory) and treats it accordingly. However, `verbatim` may not rely on the surrounding code (or the surrounding stack layout) be unmodified by the optimizer or ...." [probably some more stuff]

Depending on how we proceed with stack limit evasion we may also have to specify that yul code containing a ``memoryguard`` will need to uphold its memory guarantees (even though that's actually implicit in how the memoryguard works anyways).

Reviewer 2: Maybe we should even specify that we take the liberty to define new restrictions on verbatim in non-breaking releases or sth like that, just as a precaution against this preventing us from doing stuff because of a weird "this is breaking because of verbatim" notion...

Author: I expanded this section a little. I did not add the point about `gas` and `pc` - is this special about verbatim? Note that using `pc` is the only way to have jumps inside the verbatim bytecode.

> but control-flow should not jump out of or into this code.

Reviewer 3: For clarity, perhaps this can be reworded as st like `The optimizer works if there are jumps within ``verbatim`` code, but does not work if there are jumps into or out of ``verbatim`` code from outside ``verbatim`` code.`

Also, what does it mean `the optimizer works`? Does it mean it optimizes code outside but not inside `verbatim` block?

Reviewer: I think this is much cleaner now

the additional optimiser steps will be run on it.

verbatim
^^^^^^^^

The set of ``verbatim...`` builtin functions lets you create bytecode for opcodes
that are not known to the Yul compiler. It also allows you to create
bytecode sequences that will not be modified by the optimizer.

The functions are ``verbatim_<n>i_<m>o("<data>", ...)``, where
 - ``n`` is a decimal that specifies the number of input stack slots / variables
 - ``m`` is a decimal that specifies the number of output stack slots / variables
 - ``data`` is a string literal that contains the sequence of bytes

If you for example want to define a function that multiplies the input
by two, without the optimizer touching the constant two, you can use

.. code-block:: yul

    let x := calldataload(0)

>     let double := verbatim_1i_1o(hex"600202, x)

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    let double := verbatim_1i_1o(hex"600202", x)
```

> This code will result in a ``dupN`` opcode to retrieve ``x``

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
This code will result in a ``dup1`` opcode to retrieve ``x``
```
Maybe a bit clearer?

Author: It depends a little on x but yeah, we can write that.

> directly followed by ``600202``. The code is assumed to
> consume the copied value of ``x`` and produce the result

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
directly followed by ``600202``. The compiler assumes that the copied value,
i.e., `dup1` in this case, is consumed and produces the output
```

Reviewer 4: Should we also mention the order of the return variables? That is, for `let y, z := verbatim_1i_2o(....)`, the variable `z` is supposed to be on top of the stack, followed by `y`.

Author: good idea!

the additional optimiser steps will be run on it.

verbatim
^^^^^^^^

The set of ``verbatim`` builtin functions lets you create bytecode for opcodes
that are not known to the Yul compiler. It also allows you to create
bytecode sequences that will not be modified by the optimizer.

The functions are ``verbatim_<n>i_<m>o("<data>", ...)``, where
 - ``n`` is a decimal that specifies the number of input stack slots / variables
 - ``m`` is a decimal that specifies the number of output stack slots / variables

>  - ``data`` is a string literal that contain the sequence of bytes

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
 - ``data`` is a string literal that contains the sequence of bytes
```

>  - ``data`` is a string literal that contains the sequence of bytes

Reviewer 4: What is the maximum value of `m` and `n`?

Author: currently they are syntactically restricted to 99, but it will result in stack errors much earlier than that.

> If ``n`` is or ``m`` is zero, the full part can be left out.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
As a shorthand ``verbatim(<data>, ...)`` can be used, if ``n`` is or ``m`` is zero.
```

consume the copied value of ``x`` and produce the result
on the top of the stack. The compiler then generates code
to allocate a stack slot for ``double`` and store the result there.

Since ``verbatim`` can be used to generate arbitrary opcodes
or even opcodes unknown to the Solidity compiler, care has to be taken
when using ``verbatim`` together with the optimizer. Even when the
optimizer is switched off, the code generator has to determine
the stack layout, which means that e.g. using ``verbatim`` to modify
the stack height can lead to undefined behaviour.

The following is a (probably incomplete) list of restrictions on
verbatim bytecode that are not checked by
the compiler. Violations of these restrictions can result in
undefined behaviour.

 - Control-flow should not jump into or out of verbatim blocks,
   but it can jump within the same verbatim block.
 - Stack contents apart from the input and output parameters
   should not be accessed.
 - The stack height difference should be exactly ``m - n``
   (output slots minus input slots).
 - Verbatim bytecode cannot make any assumptions about the
   surrounding bytecode. All required parameters have to be

>    passed in as stack variables.

Reviewer 4: Can verbatim contain `msize`? The Yul optimizer currently treats AST with `msize` in a special way. Either we need to also treat `verbatim` similar to `msize` or mention in the docs that optimizer and `msize` inside verbatim is undefined behaviour.

Author: It is assumed to contain msize

Reviewer 4: I don't think we assume this:

```
	  let x := 10
	  let y := 100
	  mstore(x, y)
	  sstore(1, mload(x))
	  verbatim("xyz")
```

gets optimized to 

```
        {
            mstore(10, 100)
            sstore(1, 100)
            verbatim("xyz")
        }
```

even though the optimization is probably 'correct' in this case, we should probably skip mload resolver. It seems that the `msize` check is missing.

Author: This is fixed now. I forgot to set the flag.

The optimizer does not analyze verbatim bytecode and always
assumes that it modifies all aspects of state and thus can only

> do very few optimizations across ``verbatim`` function calls.

Reviewer 4: Currently, there are no tests for the optimizer with `verbatim`. Can you include some tests?

Author: Will add one that shows that we assume it uses msize.

The functions are ``verbatim_<n>i_<m>o("<data>", ...)``, where
 - ``n`` is a decimal between 0 and 99 that specifies the number of input stack slots / variables
 - ``m`` is a decimal between 0 and 99 that specifies the number of output stack slots / variables
 - ``data`` is a string literal that contains the sequence of bytes

If you for example want to define a function that multiplies the input
by two, without the optimizer touching the constant two, you can use

.. code-block:: yul

    let x := calldataload(0)
    let double := verbatim_1i_1o(hex"600202", x)

This code will result in a ``dup1`` opcode to retrieve ``x``
(the optimizer might directly re-use result of the
``calldataload`` opcode, though)
directly followed by ``600202``. The code is assumed to
consume the copied value of ``x`` and produce the result
on the top of the stack. The compiler then generates code
to allocate a stack slot for ``double`` and store the result there.

As with all opcodes, the arguments are arranged on the stack
with the leftmost argument on the top, while the return values
are assumed to be laid out such that the rightmost variable is

> at the stack top.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
at the top of the stack.
```

Since ``verbatim`` can be used to generate arbitrary opcodes
or even opcodes unknown to the Solidity compiler, care has to be taken
when using ``verbatim`` together with the optimizer. Even when the
optimizer is switched off, the code generator has to determine
the stack layout, which means that e.g. using ``verbatim`` to modify
the stack height can lead to undefined behaviour.

> The following is a (probably incomplete) list of restrictions on

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The following is a non-exhaustive list of restrictions on
```

verbatim bytecode that are not checked by
the compiler. Violations of these restrictions can result in
undefined behaviour.

 - Control-flow should not jump into or out of verbatim blocks,

>    but it can jump within the same verbatim block.

Reviewer 4: Is it possible to jump within the verbatim block without using `pc`? Is this something that would be used?

Author: I cannot think of a way to use it. Maybe if you put it at the beginning of the constructor, you could make assumptions about the absolute positions...

 - Stack contents apart from the input and output parameters
   should not be accessed.
 - The stack height difference should be exactly ``m - n``
   (output slots minus input slots).
 - Verbatim bytecode cannot make any assumptions about the
   surrounding bytecode. All required parameters have to be
   passed in as stack variables.

The optimizer does not analyze verbatim bytecode and always
assumes that it modifies all aspects of state and thus can only
do very few optimizations across ``verbatim`` function calls.

> Furthermore, during discussions about whether or not EVM improvements

Reviewer 5: I fear this disclaimer will be quickly ignored and the discussions will end up "but deployed contracts are using it".

However I think this disclaimer should be emphasized in a `warning::` block or something like that.

Author: Made it a warning.

> Furthermore, during discussions about whether or not EVM improvements

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Furthermore, during discussions about whether EVM improvements
```
Optional suggestion.
